In the Land of Oz, the citizens of Munchkinland celebrate the death of the Wicked Witch of the West. Glinda the Good tells the Witch's story: born from an affair between the wife of then-Governor Thropp and a traveling salesman, she was rejected from birth due to her green skin, which caused her to suffer a troubled childhood ("No One Mourns the Wicked"). When asked if she and the Witch were friends, Glinda replies that they knew each other and reflects on their past.

Years earlier, Elphaba Thropp arrives at Shiz University to drop off her paraplegic younger sister Nessarose ("Dear Old Shiz"). Madame Morrible, the Dean of Sorcery Studies, offers to privately tutor Elphaba after the latter unintentionally reveals her magical abilities; Elphaba accepts, hoping it will allow her to meet Oz's ruler, the Wizard, whom she idolizes and hopes may change her skin color ("The Wizard and I"). To her discontent, however, Elphaba is forced to share a room with bubbly, popular Galinda Upland; the two clash constantly ("What Is This Feeling?").

Nessa befriends Boq Woodsman, a happy-go-lucky munchkin with a crush on Galinda, while Elphaba encounters rebellious prince Fiyero Tigelaar and his talking horse. Dr. Dillamond, a talking goat who teaches Ozian history and faces discrimination from the school, tells Elphaba that other animals are losing their civil rights and abilities to speak, fearing he may be next ("Something Bad"). Elphaba assures Dillamond that the Wizard will handle the matter.

Fiyero decides to host a party at the Ozdust Ballroom. Galinda convinces Boq to take Nessarose so she can go with Fiyero ("Dancing Through Life"). At the Ozdust, Galinda learns she will be allowed in Morrible's sorcery seminar at Elphaba's request as thanks for convincing Boq to take Nessa. When Elphaba is ridiculed for wearing a hat Galinda gave to her as a slight, a guilty Galinda dances with her ("Ozdust Duet") and later gives her a makeover ("Popular").

The next day, Dillamond announces his retirement due to the school board now disallowing animals to teach; he is forcefully escorted out of the classroom by guards. His replacement, the unscrupulous Professor Nikidik, attempts to do live experimentation on a frightened lion cub, but Elphaba and Fiyero intervene, escape campus, and release the cub into the forest. After sharing a moment, Elphaba laments that Fiyero prefers Galinda over her ("I'm Not That Girl").

Elphaba receives a personalized summons from the Wizard, who has heard about her progress. Galinda, now shortening her name to "Glinda" in honor of Dillamond's mispronunciation of it, accompanies her. The two ride a bullet train to Oz's capital, the Emerald City, where they affirm their friendship while sightseeing ("One Short Day").

After being introduced to the Wizard ("A Sentimental Man"), Elphaba says she wishes to help the talking animals of Oz in lieu of changing her skin color. Morrible reveals she has come to witness Elphaba and the Wizard's first meeting. The Wizard and Morrible encourage Elphaba to read from the sacred Grimmerie spellbook. Her incantation makes the Wizard's monkey guards painfully sprout wings, allowing the delighted Morrible and the Wizard to use them as spies. Elphaba realizes that they are the ones behind the animals losing their rights and speech, and that the Wizard is a fraud. Horrified that she was used to unlock the Grimmerie's power and further subjugate the animals, Elphaba flees.

Glinda follows her and implores her to reconcile with Morrible and the Wizard, but Elphaba decides to stop their cruel plans. She bids an emotional farewell to Glinda, who supports her but is apprehended by guards. Elphaba uses the Grimmerie to levitate a broom and escape from the city upon it, evading the Wizard's guards and monkeys after her powers cause a power outage throughout Oz. After Morrible warns that Elphaba is a "wicked witch", the students of Shiz evacuate campus with Fiyero fleeing the school grounds on horseback, and Nessarose sees Governor Thropp suffer a heart attack as they receive the news in their Munchkinland home. Meanwhile, Elphaba flies west ("Defying Gravity").